This lecture is about working with dates.
Dates can be sometimes a little
bit tricky to work with as data
because they have all sorts of quirks like
starting over after the end of a week or
starting over after the end of the month,
and so forth.
So we're gonna start really simple,
we're gonna look at the date function, so
this is the date function right here.
And if you call it, you'll actually get
the time that is happening right then.
So this is the time that
the slides were processed.
The class of this variable is
actually just a character, so
the date function just returns a character
that gives you the date and time.
But in general, it's not always so simple.
So for example,
if you use the Sys.Date function,
you actually end up with something here
that looks a little bit just like a date,
just like you saw before but
maybe without the time.
And if you look at class of this variable
here it's actually a Date variable.
So it has some different properties that
make it a little bit nicer in terms of
analyzing Date data, but
a little bit more difficult or
tricky than dealing with just
text files in some respects.
So the first thing that we might wanna do
is reformat that into a different format.
So, for example,
we would use the format function.
We would apply it to that date.
And then we would say,
we would like to see the abbreviation for
the day, the abbreviation for the month
and then the actual date that you've seen.
So that gives you Sunday,
January 12th just like this.
You can use different characters
within these quotes, and so for
example you can get the day as a number.
You can get %a is abbreviated weekday,
capital %A is unabbreviated weekday,
lowercase %m is month,
0 to 12 and so forth.
So you can use all of this to get
the dates in ad format that is nice and
visually appealing to you.
You can also take character
vectors like this.
So here is a character vector where
I have a bunch of different dates.
And I can turn them into
dates by telling the function
as that date that you should
be looking for a day,
you should be looking for a month, and
then you should be looking for a year.
And so what will then do
is turn these into dates.
The nice thing about these is that then
you can sort of manipulate them and
figure out how far apart
they are among other things.
So for example, if I look at the
difference in time between the first day
and the second day,
there's a time difference of -1 days.
So if I subtract off the second day
from the first day I'm one day behind.
And so you can actually turn
that into a numeric variable, so
you can actually get the differences
between dates in terms of the number of
days apart that they
are very easily using dates.
You can also convert them to Julian as
well as to other different variables.
So for example if you want to know what
weekday it is, you can use the weekdays
function and it'll tell you that
this date happened on a Sunday.
You can find the months so
that happened during January, and
you can turn it into a Julian date.
And so what that is is the number of days
that have occurred since the origin,
and it will tell you
here what the origin is.
In this case,
the origin is the first of January, 1970.
So that's the number of days that
have occurred since the origin date.
The Lubridate package is
actually very nice and makes
working with dates even simpler than it is
with the ad.Date function, among others.
So if you load the Lubridate library
then what you can do is convert a number
to a date and you can do that
regardless of what the format is.
So if you tell it ymd,
that means it's gonna look for
the year first followed by the month
followed by the date in any
sort of the standard formats
that you might imagine.
So in this case it's gonna find 2014,
then 01 then 08 and turn that into a date.
You can also tell it to look for
the month first, and then the day and
the year with the mdy function.
So that's month, day, year, and
it will turn it into a date as well.
Or you can tell it to look for
day, month, year, so
that's going to find the day as 03 and
the month as 04 and the year as 2013.
So it's very nice because you don't
have to actually format the dates or
the characters before you
turn them into dates.
You can also do the same thing with time.
So you're going to start with year,
month, day.
And then you can have an underscore and
then hours, minutes,
seconds will turn this into a time,
including hours, and minutes and seconds.
If this was in a different order, so
if it started with seconds, then minutes,
then hours, you could make this ymd_,
seconds, hours, minutes, smh.
And so you can also set the time zone.
So, here's a date, or a time, that you
would like to turn into a date object,
and you can do that by setting the time
zone to be a specific time zone.
And I'm getting this from
this tutorial that was
on statistics.com about loop or date.
And so if you wanna learn more
about how to set time zones and
what time zones are,
you can look at ?Sys.timezone.
Some functions have
slightly different syntax.
So if you're using the base date
manipulation functions, you use weekday.
But if you are using
the Lubridate package,
you're gonna use wday like
this to get the weekday.
And this will give you sort of
a number here which is gonna be three.
And then if you wanna know the weekday
in terms of the actual abbreviation,
you're gonna have to say label=TRUE.
And then it'll tell you that it's Tuesday,
the third day of the week,
according to the levels that have
been defined for this variable.
So a lot more information is available on
this very nice Lubridate tutorial from
which I borrowed some of
the information for this.
You can also find similar content
in the Lubridate Package Vignette.
And ultimately you want your dates to
be of the class POSIXct or POSIXlt.
And so for
more information type ?POSIXlt and
that'll give you a little bit more
information about how to deal with dates.
This will become relevant
later when we do some modeling
in the prediction class that
deal with dates as well.